Once Around The Lost asteroid Hermes now
I put this together because I've always
been fascinated with this little object
and it all stems from reading this book
The Amateur astronomer by Sir Patrick
Moore I've still got my copy on my desk
here and I learned a lot of astronomy
from this back in the 1960s and70s
and it mentions on page 122 as it
happens just in a little paragraph the
uh first bit of this story what it talks
about is Carl Routh at the heidleberg
observatory on the 28th of October 1937
spotting a fast moving object whizzing
across the sky doing about 5 degrees per
hour so that's really quite quick for um
an astronomical object to be
moving too faint to see with a naked eye
it was magnitude 8 so a fairly small and
dim body but nevertheless very
noticeable with this High motion and he
was only able to track it across the sky
for four days or four nights be before
it disappeared and became unobservable
due to the uh fact it was heading into
the
Twilight but he gave it a name he called
it Hermes the winged messenger of the
Gods this is because it was moving so
fast it makes enormous sense actually to
choose Hermes the Greek god
there uh with his winged feet look um
but that 4 days worth of data is not
enough to be able to calculate an orbit
properly and so although it was given
the designation 1937
UB we lost it and in fact in Sir Patrick
Moore's book it just lists the fact that
uh we'd never been able to see it again
and then goes on to say well you
shouldn't worry it's probably not going
to hit the Earth We're very unlik to be
hit by an asteroid at all um I think
we've discovered rather more asteroids
since the 1960s and we need to worry
about these rather a
lot so scroll forward 70 years and Brian
skiff the lone project spotted a moving
object and when the orbit was calculated
from his observations and the
pre-recovery observations that were then
turned up on other photographs
particularly one from the Lilla
telescope from
2000 we were able to track the orbit of
this and it was realized that Hermes had
been
relocated it's now given the catalog
number
69,3 so you can see how many asteroids
had been discovered up to that point and
I think we're well past 100,000
now uh so here's the the recovery image
the green circle been added afterwards
and that just picking out the uh the
asteroid from 2003 there now when they
traced the orbit what they found was it
was quite elliptical going from inside
the orbit of Venus Venus orbits
0.7 times the Earth Sun distance 0.7 AU
from the Sun and this was going to 62 so
just a little nearer than Venus and
Crossing out to 2.68 Au which is on the
inner edge of the main belt of the
asteroids
but the orbit crosses that of Venus and
Earth and Mars and you can see that on
the diagram and the numbers there show
how closely it comes to each of those
planets Venus is the closest just a
whisker closer than the nearest possible
interaction with the Earth and Mars
little bit wider Gap there you can see
those numbers tiny fraction of an
astronomical unit so that's pretty close
and in fact in 19 37 it's been
calculated now that it came within about
3/4 of a million kilometers of the earth
there was a pass in 1942 that was
slightly closer .63 million kilm and
those numbers are just about 1.7 the
times the lunar distance so fairly close
that made it the record holder for an
asteroid coming close to Earth at the
time but no longer we've now actually
tracked asteroids that have come very
very close even coming between the Earth
and the moon and if you're prepare to
wait till 2040 on the 25th of April and
it'll do another close approach but this
one's nowhere near as close as those
others I've mentioned 4.2 million
kilometers so it'll be really quite a
faint object at that point anyway in
terms of the 1942 close approach there's
a little uh animation of Hermes in the
purple whizzing round and Earth doing
its near circular orbit and there they
had the really quite close approach
so that would have slightly deflected
its orbit and changed it this is what
happens to asteroids they get knocked
from one orbit to another and these
Planet Crossing orbits are really fairly
unstable in fact so uh not a good place
to uh try to
exist studies of the asteroid looking at
its Spectrum tell us that we can
classify this one as an S-Type asteroid
and I always joke the S type is s for
Stony it's really s for cacious meaning
made of silicates or rock in other words
so uh silicon
oxide of metals are uh the typical
composition of most rock that we see
around us and this is very common for
the inner part of the asteroid belt but
gets rarer the further out you go in the
asteroid belt shouldn't be too much of a
surprise the inner part of the solar
system has the rocky planets and the
outer solar system the gas giant planets
and the asteroid belt is a bit of a
region of transition things get less
dense as you go out through the asteroid
belt you find that the amount of carbon
goes up uh the amount of water begins to
go up as you go out through the asteroid
belt as the temperature dropped in the
in that region while the material was
trying to form and I've just put a
little image here it's not a very good
image but it's the best one we've got of
asteroid 3 Juno which is also an S Type
asteroid and uh around about 250
kilometers across it's a really big one
so I just put that in just for reference
but in terms of size
original estimates for Hermes were that
it was about 800 kilometers across
and with estimates of its mass that
meant around about 1.6 gram per cubic
cimer
so more dense than water but way less
dense than typical rocks and metals and
so forth so relatively lightly packed
together
probably now also able to look at it and
study the light coming from it and
notice that the light intensity would
wobble up and down on a period of around
about 13 to 14 hours so this light curve
shown at the right here is data that was
recorded over a period of time showing
those um variations in light so this
seemed to suggest that the body was
rotating um with a period of around 13.8
hours
but not
so fascinating latest information on
this one is that the arbo radio dish and
others had a look at it with radar and
they were able to bounce radio beams off
it and pick up two peaks and this
corresponds to the Doppler shift of a
peak moving towards and another Peak
moving
away in other words a binary asteroid
this is not a single body rotating it is
two and we can calculate the separation
between them and they are just 1200 M
apart and the orbit was calculated at
13.9 hours so that supposed rotation
period of the light curve was actually
the two objects orbiting each other that
we were in fact looking at so uh very
different cause entirely and again using
aperture radar they've been able to make
a couple of images here of these two
bodies and you can see them they're
pretty difficult to pick out from the
background and also looking slightly
elongated but uh estimates are that one
is very slightly larger than the other
600 M and 540 M for the diameters which
when you bear in mind they're only 12200
MERS apart that's um not a very big gap
it's only uh one
uh times each of those to fit into the
gap between them so the hole is not very
big but with this data we can do a
little bit of maths and I don't often do
a bit of maths in my talks I just
usually leave it but let's have a little
look we can use Kepler's thirdd Law one
of my favorite formula the time squar is
equal to 4 pi^ 2 over GM time the radius
cubed and we know the radius it's 600
M the distance between them is 12200
they're about the same size let's call R
600 and we've got 13.9 hours for the
period so if we multiply by 3,600 we get
50,400 seconds so we'll call that 50,000
as we go forward and by rearranging that
formula you can separate the M out and
uh let's do it so R cubed 600 cubed 216
* 10 6 T ^2 5 * 10 4 seconds squared
gives us 25 * 10 8 and then 4 pi^ 2 over
Newton's constant Big G is 4 * 3.14 *
3.14 divided by 6.67 * 10- 11 that last
number is Newton's constant and you get
a number 39.4 over Big G which is
5.91 * 10-1 so we've now got the 3 parts
of our formula and if we can plug them
in to separate M we get M = 4 pi^ 2/ G R
cubed over T ^2 and that's 5.91 * 10 11
for the constant bits
26 * 10 6 for R cubed and 25 * 10 8 for
the time squared so rattle through that
we come out at 51 million tons so this
is an estimate not of one of the bodies
but the total mass in the system 51
million tons H well the other thing we
could do is we could look at the volume
of a 600 meter sphere so radius 300 we
could plug in that into 4/3 pi r Cub the
formula for the area of sorry the volume
of a
sphere uh number crunch that 4.18 for
4/3 pi * 27 which is 3 Cub * 10
6 all the way down to the bottom that
comes out 180 million tons well that's a
lot more than the 50 million tons that
we had in our estimates from Kepler's
Law so and this is only one of the
bodies the 600 M sphere using that
figure of 1.6 G per cubic cm so
something doesn't quite add up and the
reason is probably because these
asteroids are not spherical they're
actually potato shaped which we can
model as an ellipsoid and the formula
for the volume of an ellipsoid rather
than 43 pi R cubed is 43 ABC where A and
C are the uh semi axes of the
ellipsoid so let's just say that perhaps
this uh squashed shape more closely
matches something that's been squashed
in the B and C directions by a factor of
two and that the 600 goes along the long
axis so that would be a quarter of the
volume and it would knock that 45 uh
sorry that 180 million tons down to 45
million tons so we're in the ballpark so
what we can deduce from this is that
these two things really are elongated
and interestingly that's roughly what we
got from the arbo radio image those
images did show slightly long thin
traces so maybe that's right um wouldn't
it be really interesting to be able to
get a proper closeup view of Hermes this
object to the right here isn't it's just
some other asteroids just to illustrate
the potato shape that you often get for
these small asteroids
now that radar reflection also suggested
to us that the two bodies were revolving
around their 13.9 hour orbit and
rotating in such a way as to keep the
long
axis um of each other towards each other
so that they were facing each other very
much like Pluto and Sharon do they are
both in Tidal lock with each other and
each keeps the same face to the other as
they go around in the earth system with
the Moon the Moon is already inter tidal
lock with the Earth but the Earth is
still spinning too quickly and then math
shows that if you waited long enough the
Earth would eventually end up in double
lock with the moon but that's such a
long way into the future other things
will have gone wrong before then like
the sun blowing
up um so anyway very interesting to see
these two and of course the light curve
probably is explained by this changing
aspect of these potato shaped objects as
they orbit around each
other so just to finish off um there I
looked up where Hermes had made its way
into sci-fi stories and there's probably
this one John Baxter
wrote a book called The Hermes fall
which I think is perhaps about asteroid
Hermes crashing into the Earth something
which uh we do need to worry about
because eventually the orbits of these
things will change and when we try to
calculate them going forward because
they get pushed off course by the solar
radiation and solar wind and so forth uh
the uh predictions are only really any
good for about a 100 years or so but
anyway uh this book was uh based on the
whole idea so thank you very much for
listening and I hope to see you on the
next one